Alright, in this video,
we're gonna look at an alternative way
to show the times in UTC times,
and the other way of doing this is to use
the SQLite date time functions
and perform the conversion before actually getting
the data back from the server,
so I'm gonna change the query here in checkdb.py
and then run the programme,
and then we'll have a look at what's happening
and refer to the SQLite documentation.
So, we're no longer with this second example,
need to import pytz, so I'm going to just delete that,
and then we're gonna change the code.
So, we're gonna start with the query,
and the query's now going to be
a little bit more complex than what it was before,
so it's gonna be select,
and I'll just delete this last part out.
Type it again.
SELECT strftime and then left print to say single quote,
percent, capital Y, dash percent, lowercase m,
dash percent, lowercase d, space,
then percent, capital H, colon,
percent, capital m, colon,
percent, lowercase f,
single quote, and then a semicolon,
then a comma, then I'm gonna type history
dot time,
and localtime
as localtime,
comma, and then we'll go to the next line here.
Then we're gonna do, then history.
We're gonna space it at the start.
History dot account, comma, space,
history dot amount,
from history,
order by
history dot time.
And by the way, if you're getting this message
popping up here, SQLite dialect is not configured,
you can actually fix that easily enough.
You can go into preferences or setup,
depending on your operating system,
and if you do a search for SQL,
you should find SQL Dialects comes up.
I click on that, and what we need to do is
look at our particular files.
In this case, checkdb.
I come over here and click on that,
and I can choose SQLite, so being specific,
turning it to the dialect of SQL that we're gonna be using,
and click OK.
Once we do that, that warning disappears now,
and then all we need to do now is
I'm going to delete all of that,
and then we're gonna just replace that,
pretty simply, with print row,
and we'll leave the db.close there.
So let's actually just try running that
to see whether it works,
and you can see here, in this case,
we get the dates back in my local time,
or we've got SQLite, rather,
to do the work for us.
So this method has the advantage
that it's gonna work whichever client is being used
to access the database,
so we could create a view with that select statement,
and the data would be available to users
in their local time, and you could use the view
from the SQLite command line interface, for example,
and get the same result.
Now, we're gonna create creative view in a minute,
but first, let's just have a look at what we've done.
So, the select query uses the SQLite's strftime function,
this one up here on line six,
to convert the time field into a string.
Now, we've seen how to use functions, such as count,
earlier in this section,
so here, we're just using a different function.
Now, the first parameter to string f time
is a format string, which determines the format
for the date and time string that'll ultimately be produced,
so next we provide a time value here in history.time,
so we're getting that from the time column
on the history table.
We then provide a modifier, localtime in this case,
and over here is the third argument,
to cause the UTC time to be converted to local time.
Now, the SQLite date time functions
are documented quite well,
so we just open that up.
Gonna browse up, and the link is in the resources section.
You can check that out at your leisure,
and you can see strftime is there,
so we do a search for that one
and find out more information about it,
or we can actually click on
and see that it's based on the C version of the
function of the same name.
And the documentation states that
there are five date and time functions,
and obviously we've used the string f time.
Now, that's strictly the only one that's necessary,
the string f time, because all the others
can be expressed using that one.
The other functions are really just provided for convenience
so that you don't have to mess around with format strings.
Now, they may also be more efficient,
because strftime is a more generic function.
It has to pass the format string, for example,
which makes it less efficient than the other methods,
so you might be asking, at this point,
why have I used string f time, or strftime,
instead of datetime?
I'll leave you to have a go at changing the query
to use the datetime function instead.
Just remember to remove the format string
and refer to this documentation for the parameters.
Now, when you get it working,
notice that the seconds are displayed as whole seconds,
with no fractional part, so it doesn't round either.
It just truncates the fractional part.
Now, in some applications, that'll be fine,
but in our application,
we need millisecond accuracy to ensure the transactions,
or that transactions appear in the correct order.
Now, in fact, the sharp eyed amongst you may have noticed
that the SQLite function doesn't provide
the same level of accuracy as the Python method.
We'll just go back to the code now.
The database is storing six decimals for the seconds,
and we'll just confirm that.
One two three four five six,
after the dot 32,
but in terms of our output,
from the checkdb code that we've created,
we're only seeing three decimal points.
In other words, the SQLite date functions only work
to three decimal places.
Now, this is mentioned in the documentation.
I won't go back to it now, but it's under the last paragraph
in the time string section,
and that's why I ordered our query by the time field,
rather than from our calculated local field,
so here, order by history.time
instead of doing it with our calculated field here,
which was localtime.
That way, we're still getting the benefit
of the six decimal points of precision.
Now, the SQLite date functions only work,
as you can see, to three decimal points.
Now, this is mentioned in the documentation,
which I will zip back to quickly,
and it's under time strings,
down here.
So that's actually why I ordered our query
by the time field, rather than from our
calculated local time field,
so just to show you what I mean.
Say the SQLite order by clause on the line seven here
is still using the history dot time field
directly from the database,
and we're not trying to order by this localtime,
so as a result, we're still getting the time
in the six decimal places instead of three,
so it's more accurate.
And just to confirm, if we open the history table,
you can see that that is six decimal points
of precision there, compared to the three that our output
by the checkdb programme using this strftime function.
I'll just go back to the documentation again,
and just before we actually finish with it,
the SQLite strftime function's format string
behaves slightly differently to Python's,
and it's quite actually hard to spot from the documentation,
but if we do a search for percent f,
see here, under fractional seconds,
SS dot SSS,
notice that it includes SS
to the left of the decimal point,
so percent f, when using the strftime function,
will give you seconds and their fractional part.
Now, if you use the Python strp time function,
the percent f will only give you the fractional part.
So in other words, in Python,
we would need to use a percent capital S,
dot percent f to get the full seconds value.
Now, I mentioned earlier that it's important
to refer to the correct set of documentation,
and if you're using Python functions,
make sure you use the Python SQLite3 library documentation,
and when working with SQLite, use the SQLite documentation.
Alright, so let's go back now to our code
and create a view for this query,
so we're gonna go back to rollback.py,
and a place for adding the view is obviously there,
because that's where we're creating the tables,
so I'm gonna go back and copy all the text
from db.execute onwards
and paste it into rollback.py.
Let's go back and do that,
so I'm just gonna do db.execute and copy that,
and go back to rollback.py.
We're gonna put that below the two table creations
and get rid of the colon on the end.
So, now what we need to do is change that a little bit
to create a view, rather than executing query,
so I'm gonna add this at the start,
instead of select, we're gonna do create view
if not exists,
localhistory as,
and leave the rest of the lines in there,
and we got a warning here about the line being too long,
so I'm just going to split it there.
And just to be complete, we need to put a space there
to keep everything happy and make sure that
we've got a relevant space so that the SQL code still works,
and we'll also modify the connexion now,
accounts dot sqlite.
Let's also do that detect underscore types
is equal to sqlite dot PARSE underscore DECLTYPES,
which we talked about,
and when we do that, we get this warning,
which we can see over here,
and we can fix that warning up if we want to
by just going again into our preferences or settings,
doing a search for SQL and go to SQL Dialects,
and then we can select the file.
In this case, rollback, and change that to SQLite too,
just if you wanna get rid of the warning.
It'll work without it,
but it looks a bit nicer without any warnings.
Alright, so let's clear the history table again.
I'm going to select all four,
delete them, and then save it.
Obviously, we've got an empty history table there now.
Alright, and we're going to run this
so the view gets created.
No errors, which is good,
and if you go back now to checkdb,
we can change the code from there,
and let's do that and use the query,
so I'm just gonna comment that code out.
We've got a reference tool,
and then we'll put instead for row in db.execute,
and it's gonna be now SELECT star from localhistory
being the name of our view.
We should be able to run that now,
with the same results.
You can see, we've got the results now,
and obviously it's been updated,
'cause I'm running this at a later point
in my local time.
Now, we can go back to history and we can go to refresh.
There's our entries,
and again, you can see the six points of precision there,
compared to three decimal points of precision
from using the
string f time,
the strftime function, which is part of SQLite.
So, again, we're still storing it,
and you have the history table in UTC time,
but we're outputting it now by the view
in my local timezone time,
so if you run this programme, you'll find that
the time outputting will be in whatever timezone
is configured on your computer.
Just keep in mind to remember to refresh the history table
in the database viewer to ensure that the two sets of data
will tally, and they should certainly do that.
Alright, so the dates have come back as strings,
so if you want date time values,
you'd have to parse the dates
using the date classes strptime method,
but because there's no timezone information,
these string values can be successfully parsed
into date time values using the strptime function,
so that's two different approaches
to retrieving the time stamps
and displaying them in the user's local time.
Each one has its advantages and disadvantages,
so it's handy to have both methods
in your arsenal of techniques.
Now, I've demonstrated these techniques
using our accounts class,
but they can be used whenever you need to store time values
in a SQLite database.
One thing that neither approach lets us do
is store the original timezone information
in the database.
As I mentioned, there are external libraries
that can make this easier,
but it is possible using standard Python
and the pytz library,
and we're gonna see how to do this in the next video,
but I'm going to set it as a challenge.
This challenge is gonna be optional.
If you need to work with dates and times a lot,
I do suggest giving it a go,
and I'll provide some hints
so that you don't waste a lot of time
trying things that just won't work,
but if you're not likely to use dates and times very often
in your databases, then perhaps just skip to the solution
so you know how to do it should you need to.
Alright, so let's move onto that video now.